title: definition basics
tags: math

## algebra

A _binary operation_ on a set $S$ is a pairwise operation $S \times S \rightarrow S$. The set is _closed_ under the operation.

A _semigroup_ is a set of elements and an associative binary operation operating on the set.

A _monoid_ is a semigroup with an identity element.

A _group_ is a set of monoid such that for each element there exists an inverse element

A _commutative group_ (also known as an _abelian group_) is a group whose operation is commutative.

A _ring_ is a set of elements and two binary operations $(+)$ and $(\times)$ such that:

- it forms an abelian group under $(+)$
- it forms a monoid under $(\times)$
- $(\times)$ distributes over $(+)$

A _field_ is a ring such that:

- for each nonzero element (where $0$ is the additive identity) there exists an inverse element
- $(\times)$ is commutative

The integers $\mathbb{Z}$ are the cannonical example of a ring. The integers are not a field because some inverses are not contained in the set (e.g. 1/5).

## topology

A _topological space_ is a set equipped with a _topology_.

A _topology_ $T$ on a set $X$ is a collection of subsets of $X$ such that:

- the empty set and $X$ are elements of $T$
- arbitrary unions are elements of $T$
- finite intersections are elements of $T$

The elements of $T$ are defined to be _open sets_. A subset that is a complement of a closed set is an _open set_.

Why are the intersections finite and not arbitrary? How do we fit a counterexample into the frame of the subset definition?

Using De Morgan's laws for set complements (union of complements is complement of intersection; intersection of complements is complement of union), we can rewrite these properties:

- the empty set and $X$ are closed
- the arbitrary intersection of closed sets is closed (i.e. the complement of the arbitrary intersection of closed sets is open)
- the finite union of closed sets is closed (i.e. the complement of the finite union of closed sets is open)

There is also a definition based on neighborhoods of points.

## category theory

A _category_ consists of:

- a collection of objects
- for each pair of objects, a collection of morphisms (arrows) from one to the other
- for each pair of compatible morphisms, a binary operation called composition

such that:

- if $u: a \rightarrow b$ and $v: b \rightarrow c$ then there is a morphism $u \circle v: a \rightarrow c$
- composition of morphisms is associative
- for each object $a$, there is an identity morphism $I_a$ such that for any morphism $u: a \rightarrow b$, $I_a \circle u = u \circle I_b = u$ 

## analysis
